Rules 

1) Introduction  

Spades is a popular trick-taking game played by two partnerships 

2) Players 

The game is played by Four players out of which three are computer and 
one is human. These four players form two partnerships 

3) Goal 

The objective of the game is to win at least the number of tricks that the 
player bids on before starting the game. The player has to reach a preset number of 
points to win the game. Normally the first pair to reach 500 points wins but in our 
game the number of points is presettable.  

4) Setup 

Partners sit across from each other on the table. Each player gets 13 cards to 
being with. They place the bid before starting the game. The bid ranges from nil to 10 

5) Bidding 

Players get to make a bid on the number of tricks they think they can win after 
looking at their hand. The total number of bids for a partnership is equal to the 
sum of the bid by individual players.  

5.1) Nil Bidding  

Nil bidding implies that the player won't win any trick. Both the partners are 
allowed to bid nil 

5.2) Double Bidding 

Double bidding implies that the player bids nil without seeing the hand. After 
the cards are dealt, the player gets to exchange three cards with his partner.

Both the partners can bid double nil ,but in this case no exchange of cards takes place 
 

6) Gameplay 

The game is played clockwise. The player who starts the game throws a card of a particular 
suite. To win the trick , other players have to throw a card of the same suite and the 
player with the highest card wins. Spades suite acts as a trump card here. This means 
that if you do not have a card of the suite that is being played and if you throw spades, 
you win the hand. If there are spades on the table then the highest spades win. 

7) Scoring 

As mentioned before, the players can preset the amount of points needed to win. The default 
number of points to win is 500.

Each trick in bid gets you 10 points. Tricks that you win after reaching the bid fetch 
you 1 point each.

 

For example if you bid 3 tricks and win 5 tricks then your total score is 32 

If you can't complete the bid then you lose 10 points for every trick you couldn't win.  

7.1) Nil scoring 

If the player bids nil and takes no trick, he/she earns a 100 point bonus. If the partnership 
bids nil and succeeds in winning NO tricks then they get a 200 point bonus.

If the player wins a trick he gets a 100 point penalty and if the partnership wins any 
trick then they get a 200 point penalty.  
 

7.2) Double Nil scoring 

When the player bids double nil and wins no trick , he is entitled to a 200 point bonus. Similarly, 
if the partnership bids double nil and has succeeds then they get a 400 point bonus.

Like nil bidding, the player gets a 200 point penalty for winning a trick and the partnership gets 
a 400 point penalty for winning any trick. If one of the player wins a trick and the other doesn't 
then the penalty and the bonus cancel each other and the partnership gets 0 points
